Here is some information that you may find of interest.  Let us know if you have
any more questions.   Instructions to the training hill are included below.

  Fly Away provides all of the necessary equipment that you will need to
learn to fly.  We train here in Santa Barbara on a hill on the southern side of
Elings Park, one of the best, most consistent, training hills in the world. 
Elings Park is a nonprofit organization that allows us to fly in this beautiful
environment that overlooks the ocean. 
You will fly Wills Wing Condors and Falcons, the state of the art
training gliders. Lessons will last as long as your endurance will last, usually
4 to 6 hours, and many flights.  We limit our classes to 2 people per instructor
(except by special request).  You will likely have your own glider to fly,
possibly sharing one with one other student.  Just like learning anything new,
the more days a month/week that you can dedicate to learning to fly, the quicker
you will progress.  We specialize in personalized instruction.  One on one.
        
The training hill is consistent, being trainable over 300 days a year.   It has gentle
breezes that blow up the slope, making for perfect training conditions.
If it is feasible to get to Santa Barbara to learn to fly, we would highly encourage it.
We will progress you as quickly as safely possible and at a rate at which you
are comfortable with.  We have a perfect safety record and plan to keep it that
way.
It's warm and sunny here in Santa Barbara year round, and we have fresh,
clean, smog-free air.  The weather is basically perfect for training
at the Mesa year round, unless it's actually raining.
Hang gliding really is the closest you will ever come to flying like a
bird or the flying you've done in your dreams.  Plus it is also the least
expensive and most exhilarating form of personal flight.  It is safer than
general aviation, aside from flying in a commercial aircraft.  Hang gliding is
the ultimate high. 

We are available 7 days a week, by appointment.  We require a deposit
in advance to secure your lesson.  Our classes often fill up during the weekend.
Usually it takes students one day to get their Hang 1,Beginning rating.
It takes an average of 6 to 10 days to achieve your Hang 2, Novice rating
This includes several mountain lessons.  You Novice rating allows you to 
fly unsupervised from our novice mountain site, Alternator.
Students average 20 feet in the air by the end of the first lesson.
Quick learning students make it to the top of our 200 foot training hill their
first lesson.  The average student makes it to the top of the hill by their 2nd
or 3rd lesson, where you will have minute long flights. Then you will fly off
our local Novice mountain site at 3800 feet and the flight will last about 15 to
20 minutes.  Advanced pilots average 2 hours per flight in our local mountains.
We have a video camera available if you are interested in having a
video to take home with you.  And of course you are welcome to bring your own
video and/or still camera also.  For some students, being able to see a video of
themselves right there on the hill after the flight can be a great form of
instruction.
We offer transport to the top of our 200 foot high training hill via a
glider hauling vehicle for $3 a 'hike' if you don't want to hike it yourself.
For most people, this results in 3 times as many flights per
lesson than hiking it yourself.  This is one of our biggest advantages over most
other schools.  This and our consistent training hill with regards to weather,
and excellent instruction is why our students progress often twice or three
times as fast, requiring half as many lessons as most other schools.  Most
students who see how we train after they have learned to fly elsewhere wish they
had known about us before.
You may choose to buy the Hang Gliding Training Manual. It is a $30
book (about an inch thick but it has many pictures and diagrams). It is the
bible for learning how to fly hang gliders and you could have it all read and be
ready to put to practice when you start lessons.

We offer day lessons for $175 per person.  
Sorry, we don't accept credit cards and we prefer cash.

Group rates for single lessons are:

2 people $165 per person
3 $155
4 $145
5 $135
6 $125
7 $115
Eight or more people can be accommodated upon request.
Our specialty is quality, usually one on one instruction.
One major reason our students progress at 2 to 3 times the rate of
most other schools.
On a solo training hill lesson, students average 10 to 20 feet off
the ground by the end of their first day.  Many students receive their Hang 1
(Beginner) Rating in one day.  We will spend some time in the simulator and
running on very shallow slopes, learning to fly the glider while safely on the
ground.  As soon as you can 'keep target' (looking at the target during your
whole flight) and have a light touch, we will go higher up the hill.
These flights will be about 10 to 20 seconds long and we can video them.
We can then download these flights onto a VHS tape for you to have.
The glider knows how to fly better than you do on your first day.
If you allow it to fly, you will have a great first day.  We have students make
it to the top of the 200 foot training hill on their first day.  Most students
make it to the top of the training hill by their 2nd.
You will have about 20 flights a day on the training hill.  Your
progress depends on your endurance and natural skills and ability to learn new
sports.
We are looking forward
to hearing from you again and would like to teach you to fly.

Blue Skies,

Tammy Burcar 
James Gardner 
(805) 957-9145 
Fly Away Hang Gliding 
PO Box 3274 
Santa Barbara, CA 93130 
www.flyaboveall.com/flyaway

Here are the DIRECTIONS TO ELINGS PARK, the hang gliding training hill in Santa
Barbara:

Coming north into Santa Barbara from LA, you will take the Las Positas exit. 
Take a left, go over the bridge towards the ocean.  Go about 1 mile, through
several stoplights and you will come to a "T" intersection.  This is Cliff Dr. 
Take a left.  COUNT 6 TELEPHONE POLES (a couple hundred yards) on the left side
and there will be a small gravel pullout on the left.  There is a small brown
kiosk and a gate.  If the gate is open, come on up.  If it's closed wait there. 
We have a white Toyota van and a red Subaru Brat.

============================
Below is a section that will help answer frequently
asked questions.  The headings are:

HANG GLIDING AND PARAGLIDING COMPARISONS 
SAFETY ISSUES 
FINANCIAL ISSUES 
SITE ISSUES 
TANDEMS
===============================

HANG GLIDING AND PARAGLIDING COMPARISONS

Well to be honest being biwingual is the best.  And a quiver of gliders
  of each kind too.  But back to reality....... Tammy is a certified
  paraglider instructor also, although she focuses on hang gliding for
  several reasons. Primarily we love the sport of hang gliding because
  it is the closest to flying like a bird or like in your dreams that
  humans will ever achieve.  You are proned out, you move your body like
  most people in their dreams move to maneuver, and you can fly fast if
  you want to.  Flying a paraglider is much more like floating in the
  air.  Beginner hang gliders will go 40 to 50 mph if you want them to
  but most often students and advanced pilots fly them at about the same
  speed that paragliders fly.  What this means is that hang gliders have
  a bigger 'speed range', which is one of the major safety advantages
  that hang gliders have.  This speed is also mitigated by our wheels
  and control bar.  We have wheels to roll in on if we choose not to put
  our feet down on landing.  An advanced glider can get up to 100 if you
  want it to.  Ultimately, this ability to attain higher speeds is what
  makes hang gliding a less dangerous activity on the 'good' highly
  unstable, highly soarable days than paragliding.  Speed and altitude
  are your friends.  If the wind picks up too strong, a paraglider
  cannot penetrate any longer and will start going backwards.  On the
  other hand you don't have to go that fast, and most of the time we
  spend catching thermals and trying to stay up long and possibly go
  cross country for some major miles once you get into the sport a bit.

SAFETY ISSUES 
There is a common misconception that paragliding is safer than
  hang gliding.  They are both basically just as safe/dangerous as the
  other.  No aviation is inherently safe and you must respect the
  aircraft you are flying.  Hang gliding used to be quite dangerous in
  the 1970's.  Unfortunately it still suffers under this reputation. 
  Hang gliding is now safer than general aviation; small aircraft. 
  Commercial aircraft are still the safest way to travel, but as far as
  any other flying machine, hang gliding and paragliding are the safest.
  There are several reasons for this.  Primarily, hang
  gliders/paragliders do not rely on engines.  You will only launch and
  fly where there is a landing zone within an easy glide.  Over 90% of
  powered aircraft accidents occur because of some kind of engine
  problem, often fuel starvation of some sort.  Secondly, hang glider
  pilots are in general in better shape and less likely to have a heart
  attack while flying.  There were 2 primary reasons pilots got
  hurt/died; 1) There wasn't good instruction available.  People built
  their own kites, and 'taught' themselves how to fly. 2) The gliders
  were not certified.  Many pilots died in 'full luff dives'.  Now
  modern gliders are certified by the HGMA (Hang Glider Manufacturers
  Association) to stringent strength and stability standards.  They are
  certified to 6G's positive and 4.5 G's negative, more than most other
  aircraft.  And most importantly they are now pitch stable due to some
  new design innovations in the last 15 years.  We also now use wheels. 
  Believe it or not back in the 'old days' students didn't use wheels
  and many people broke their arms.  Seems quite simple, but it took
  many broken arms to figure that one out.  When a hang glider 'crashes'
  you have a control bar (crash bar) surrounding you that impacts first
  and takes most of the impact.  Paragliders can collapse in 'big' air,
  ie. thermals.  Thermals are what we want to 'catch' in order to soar
  in the air for hours.  Paragliders are not the stable canopies that
  sky diving parachutes are.  Paragliders are less stable and prone to
  'collapses'.  There is nothing rigid holding it together, just air
  pressure, as you inflate the canopy, that keeps it in an airfoil
  shape.  In a paraglider, it's just you and the ground if the canopy
  collapses and you end up meeting the ground at higher speeds. 
  Paragliders suitable for new students will recover by themselves. 
  Both hang glider and paraglider pilots fly with reserve parachutes,
  for emergencies.  It is more common for paragliders to come down under
  their reserve parachute, usually due to turbulence of some form.  The
  pilots that are getting hurt are those who:  1.  Don't get good
  instruction (you're putting you life into this instructors hands, make
  sure you have checked their background and trust them). 2.  Novice
  pilots who go to the mountains too soon in their training/flying
  career, especially into thermally/windy conditions that are above
  their skill level. 3.  Advanced pilots flying in conditions that are
  beyond the capacity of their aircraft or in conditions that are beyond
  their skill level.

FINANCIAL ISSUES 
Hang gliding is the cheapest form of aviation.  Getting set up
in either hang gliding or paragliding, with all new equipment, will
cost you around $4000.  Used, it can be around $2500.  The introductory
costs are the same for both hang gliding and paragliding, but a hang
glider will last about 5 times longer than a paraglider, depending on
how it's taken care of.  With a quick look at the different thickness
in the fabrics used in the different gliders, you will be able to see
why.  So in the long run, hang gliding is the least expensive form of
aviation that exists, especially for the amount of air time you will
get in return.

SITE ISSUES 
Our local Santa Barbara mountains are not as paraglider friendly as
hang glider friendly.  Most of our landing zones (LZ's) are a
relatively long glide out from their respective launches in the
mountains.  Hang gliders, even beginner hang gliders, have a better
glide than paragliders do.  Paragliders, having less performance, are
more limited in the weather conditions they can fly in than hang
gliders.  This translates to fewer safely flyable days, especially in
the mountains. The primary advantage of paragliders is convenience. 
There is no need to build a rack to carry a hang glider on your
vehicle, and it is easier to go for a 'flying tour' overseas.  The
beginning skills of paragliding are easier for some people to learn
than the beginner skills for hang gliding.  Although both are
complicated and can be frustrating on your first day.  The advanced
skills for paragliding are more difficult than the advanced skills in a
hang glider.  By 'advanced', meaning soaring skills that you will
hopefully be looking forward to within a couple months of starting to
learn to fly. It is fairly obvious that hiking a hang glider around is
going to be more work physically.  We have designed the glider hauling
vehicle, which will carry the glider up the hill for you once you've
made it to the top of the hill.  You will probably make it to the top
of the hill by the 2nd, depending on how fast you
learn.  It is a little more difficult to learn the basics of hang
gliding.  Learning to hang glide averages 6 days on the training hill
and then you will be able to safely fly from the mountains under
instructor supervision.  It takes 6 days to get your Para 2 (Novice
paragliding rating), but it will take more weeks/months of practice on
the training hill to safely fly a paraglider in the mountain.  The
difference is that hang gliders can fly safely in more weather
conditions (ie. more wind, turbulence) that paragliders cannot fly
safely in, because hang gliders do not collapse.  Paragliders can
collapse.   
Please feel free to call or e-mail us to discuss this further.  Or if
you'd like to come down to the training hill to check out a lesson in
advance of your lesson you are welcome to do that also. We are serious
about safety and expect the same out of my students.  There is
absolutely no reason to get hurt in this sport if you respect the
aircraft you are flying and use good judgment.  That is what you are
paying us for during the lesson; to keep you safe and pass on this
responsibility of judgment onto you throughout lessons.  You will
earn your Hang 2 and be allowed to fly in the mountains on your own
when you show us the consistent judgement that you are able to keep
yourself safe. We've been training for over 13 years and have never
sent a student to the hospital, and we believe that there is no reason
for that to ever happen.  We hope this information will help you make a
wiser choice for your own flying desires and needs.

TANDEMS 
We suggest a lesson on the training hill first instead of a tandem flight. 
There are several reasons for this. The training hill is 'on' more days
than the mountains and you are guaranteed to fly on your first lesson. 
Most students get 20 to 30 feet in the air, by themselves by the end of
their first lesson (some as high as 200 feet high). 
You start on flat ground so there is much less
'adrenaline'  involved than in a mountain tandem.  During a
training hill lesson, you will be in control of your flying (with an instructor
running along side helping if you need it at first).  
 You are just a passenger, not a pilot.  You are along for a ride like at
Disneyland.  Also there are many people that get airsick on a tandem flight
(like myself) but have no problem